SOURCE: https://www.wbur.org/news/2026/06/23/massachusetts-high-court-rent-control-ballot-question-struck
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03T20:12:35Z

Skip to main content
WBUR
Listen Live: Loading...
Donate
WBUR
Listen Live: Loading...
Donate
Listen Live
Sections
Local Coverage
Arts & Culture
Business
Education
Environment
Field Guide To Boston
Health
Investigations
Cognoscenti
Boston News Quiz
Radio
All Radio Programs
All Things Considered
Here & Now
Morning Edition
On Point
On-Air Schedule
Ways To Listen
Podcasts
All Podcasts
Beyond All Repair
Circle Round
Endless Thread
Last Seen
The Midnight Rebellion
Violation
Events
CitySpace Calendar
Watch Past Events
Events Newsletter
Rent CitySpace
The WBUR Festival
Support
Member Services
Become A Member
Donate Your Car
Join The Murrow Society
Make A Donation
Become A Sponsor
Create A Custom Podcast
Support WBUR
High court derails rent control ballot question, citing mention of religion
Gintautas Dumcius
Updated June 23, 2026
Share
The state’s Supreme Judicial Court ruled a ballot question seeking to bring rent control back to Massachusetts cannot go forward this November, because it includes a religious exemption.
The proposal limits annual rent increases for residences, but it carved out exemptions for several types of units, including ones “operated solely for … religious … purposes." As a result, the court said it concluded the petition “relates to religion, religious practices or religious institutions,” which the state Constitution does not allow to go before voters.
The ruling ends what promised to be one of the most expensive ballot initiative showdowns this year.
Attorney General Andrea Campbell’s office had argued it properly certified the petition because the question did not discriminate in favor of religious institutions, and pointed to exemptions for units that would be considered secular.
But the court’s ruling said the existence of secular exemptions does not change the fact that the proposal has a carveout for religious facilities.
Four voters who oppose rent control brought the lawsuit before the Supreme Judicial Court.
In recent weeks, rent control supporters pushed for a compromise bill, urging state lawmakers to pass it as legislation before July 1. But top lawmakers balked, in part because the Supreme Judicial Court hadn’t yet ruled.
“While we firmly believe that Massachusetts voters were prepared to vote ‘no’ in November, today’s decision puts the issue to rest and protects our housing pipeline and our communities from the proven damage that rent control inflicts,” Conor Yunits, who led the real estate industry-backed ballot committee opposing the question, said in a statement.
“We are incredibly grateful to the countless small property owners, real estate professionals, elected officials, and community leaders who supported our coalition,” he wrote, adding, “and we look forward to working together to create more homes and tackle affordability through real policy solutions.”
In a statement, Noemi Ramos, who headed up the pro-rent control ballot committee, called the decision a “massive disappointment” but “far from the end of our campaign to protect Massachusetts renters from excessive rent hikes.”
She and other proponents hinted they could try to get another rent control petition on the 2028 statewide ballot. Ramos wrote the court’s issue with the current question is “easily fixable.”
The seven-member Supreme Judicial Court has played a major role this ballot cycle, knocking down some ballot questions and giving others the go-ahead as lawsuits from opponents landed in their laps. Earlier this month, the court blocked an effort to lower the state’s income tax while allowing measures that would end recreational marijuana shops and overhaul the state’s primary election system.
Massachusetts voters are still likely to see a jam-packed ballot when they enter the polling booth in November, with up to eight questions.
In addition to the marijuana measure and the primary system overhaul, other potential questions for this year’s ballot include ones dealing with a proposed increase in tax rebates, Election Day voter registration and the placement of the governor’s office and the Legislature under the state’s public records law.
Voters could also weigh in on a gun law repeal, collective bargaining for Committee for Public Counsel Services workers, zoning for starter homes, and the dedication of funds for recreation and outdoor spaces.
This article was originally published on June 23, 2026.
2026 Election2026 ballot questions
Related:
To avoid a costly ballot question fight, Massachusetts rent control supporters are floating a compromise
Court OKs ballot question that would eliminate party primaries in Mass.
Mass. high court blocks state income tax question from November ballot
Gintautas Dumcius Senior reporter
Gintautas “Gin” Dumcius is a senior reporter covering state politics at WBUR.
More…
Support WBUR
Support WBUR
Resume
Listen Live
Loading...
Contact Us
(617) 353-0909
info@wbur.org
890 Commonwealth Ave.
Boston, MA 02215
More ways to get in touch.
About WBUR
Who We Are
Inside WBUR
Board Of Directors
Community Advisory Board
Transparency
Careers
WBUR Staff
Ethics Guide
Licensing WBUR Content
Support WBUR
Make A Donation
Volunteer
Member Services
Become A Member
Donate Your Car
Join The Murrow Society
Become A Sponsor
Follow
Facebook
Instagram
YouTube
Linkedin
© Copyright WBUR 2026
WBUR Privacy Policy
Syndication
FCC Applications
FCC Public File
WBUR EEO Reports
Public File Assistance
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
